### Task 1
**Load and Inspect the Data!**  
Open some of the census csv files in the navigator. How are they named? What kind of information do they hold? What tools will you need to import and clean this data?  

In the first code block of notebook.Rmd, import the `readr`, `dplyr`, and `tidyr` libraries to aid you in your data cleaning. Begin by creating a variable called files and set it equal to the list.files() of all of the csv files you want to import.  
* Read each file in files into a data frame using `lapply()`and save the result to `df_list`.  
* Concatenate all of the data frames in `df_list` into one data frame called `us_census`.  
```{r message=FALSE, warning=FALSE, error=TRUE}
# load CSVs
files <- list.files(pattern = "states_.*csv")
df_list <- lapply(files,read_csv)
us_census <- bind_rows(df_list)
```

### Task 2
**Remove and Reformat the Columns**
When inspecting us_census you notice a column X1 that stores meaningless information. Drop the X1 column from us_census, and save the resulting data frame to us_census. View the head of us_census.  
```{r error=TRUE}
# drop X1 column
us_census <- us_census %>%
  select(-X1)
head(us_census)

```

### Task 3
You notice that there are 6 columns representing the population percentage for different races. The columns include the percent symbol %. Remove the percent symbol % from each of the race columns (Hispanic,White,Black,Native,Asian,Pacific). Save the resulting data frame to us_census, and view the head.  
```{r error=TRUE}
# remove % from race columns
us_census <- us_census %>%
  mutate(Hispanic = gsub('\\%', '', Hispanic)) %>%
  mutate(White = gsub('\\%', '',White)) %>%
  mutate(Black = gsub('\\%', '',Black)) %>%
  mutate(Native = gsub('\\%', '',Native)) %>%
  mutate(Asian = gsub('\\%', '',Asian)) %>%
  mutate(Pacific = gsub('\\%', '',Pacific)) 
head(us_census)


```

### Task 4
Remove the $ from the Income column. Save the resulting data frame to us_census. View the head of us_census.  

```{r error=TRUE}
# remove $ from Income column
us_census <- us_census %>%
  mutate(Income = gsub('\\$', '',Income))
head(us_census)

```

### Task 5
The `GenderPop` column appears to hold the male and female population counts. Separate this column at the _ character to create two new columns: `male_pop` and `female_pop`. Save the resulting data frame to us_census, and view the head.  
```{r error=TRUE}
# separate GenderPop column
us_census <- us_census %>%
  separate(GenderPop, c('male_pop','female_pop'),'_')
head(us_census)

```

### Task 6
You notice the new `male_pop` and `female_pop` columns contain extra characters M and F, respectively. Remove these extra characters from the columns. Save the resulting data frame to us_census, and view the head.
```{r error=TRUE}
# clean male and female population columns
us_census <- us_census %>%
  mutate(male_pop = gsub('\\M','',male_pop) )%>%
  mutate(female_pop = gsub('\\F','',female_pop)) 
head(us_census)
```

### Task 7
 Convert all of these columns (Hispanic,White,Black,Native,Asian,Pacific,Income,male_pop,female_pop) to have a data type of numeric. Save the resulting data frame to us_census, and view the head.
   ```{r error=TRUE}
# update column data types
us_census <- us_census %>%
  mutate(Hispanic = as.numeric(Hispanic)) %>%
  mutate(White = as.numeric(White)) %>%
  mutate(Black = as.numeric(Black)) %>%
  mutate(Native = as.numeric(Native))%>%
  mutate(Asian = as.numeric(Asian))%>%
  mutate(Pacific = as.numeric(Pacific))%>%
  mutate(Income = as.numeric(Income))%>%
  mutate(male_pop = as.numeric(male_pop))%>%
  mutate(female_pop = as.numeric(female_pop))
head(us_census)
```

### Task 8
Take a second to look back at the Hispanic, White, Black, Native, Asian, and Pacific columns. The columns represent the population percentage for each race. Earlier you removed the % symbol, and then you just converted the column to numeric type. To make calculations easier, the column should now represent percentages in decimal form, where 50% is equivalent to 0.50
```r
# update values of race columns
us_census <- us_census %>%
  mutate(Hispanic = Hispanic/100,
    White = White/100,
    Black = Black/100,
    Native = Native/100,
    Asian = Asian/100,
    Pacific = Pacific/100)
```

### Task 9
It’s always a good idea to check if there are duplicate rows of data in a data set. Pipe us_census into the duplicated() function to see which rows are duplicated. Then pipe the result into table() to get a count of the duplicated rows.
```r
# remove duplicate rows
duplicated(us_census) %>%
  table()
```

Since there are duplicates, update the value of us_census to be the us_census data frame with only unique/distinct rows.  
 ```r
 #check for duplicate rows
us_census <- us_census %>%
  distinct()
```
Confirm that there are no more duplicated rows in us_census. Pipe us_census into the duplicated() function to see which rows are duplicated. Then pipe the result into table() to get a count of the duplicated rows.  
You should expect to see no TRUEs!
